---
title: 'Topic 4'
hide_page_title: false
hide_git_sync_repo_link: false
visible: true
show_sidebar: '0'
---

## Topic 4: Institutionalization of Teaching and Learning

In his essay *“Towards a place for study in a world of instruction”* McClintock (1971/2000) observes how the modern era’s institutionalization of study progressively led to a fundamental shift in practice:

 ! *Rarely does one hear that study is the raison d'etre of an educational institution; teaching and learning is now what it is all about, and with this change, has come a change in the meaning of the venerable word "learning." Once it described what a man acquired as a result of serious study, but now it signifies what one receives as a result of good teaching. The psychology of learning is an important topic in educational research, not because it will help students improve their habits of study, but because it enables instructors to devise better strategies of teaching.* (p. 179).

The institutionalization of study begins as the story of how education begins through family relations. Grumet (1988) argues, *“what is most fundamental to our lives as men and women sharing a moment on this planet is the process of reproducing ourselves” (p. 8)*. The critical insight, here, is that as human beings we reproduce ourselves biologically, ideologically and critically. While familial learning practices have histories beyond memory or record, we may infer from accounts of foraging societies that “the youth [were] trained to practice the arts which their parents [knew], to continue their friendships and alliances, and to cherish their resentments” (Williams, p. 19). Studies of juveniles in hunting and gathering societies, as well as in lower primates social groups, suggest there was “little teaching (that is, direct and deliberate tuition) of the younger members by mature individuals” (Herzog, 1984, p. 74).

Rather, learning in the distant past was a socialization process, predominately in the form of “play” with “peers and slightly older playmates” involving “imitative activities” of “competent behavior” being observed within the context of the local “social and physical environment” during a “period of freedom from responsibility and of the need for self-support” that was “unusually long” compared to other species (Herzog, 1984, pp. 75-74). This process of learning through indirect (social role-modelling) and direct teaching in family relations continues today in the pre-school years of children.

Western institutions of study first appear within the context of ancient Greek society. The Greek system was based on both informal familial and community schooling, along with formal schooling in the form of private tutors or schools for those of economic means. The existence of formal schooling in early antiquity, however, does not mean it was commonplace. Indeed, the primary institutional form of education was the family and community. In ancient Athens, as noted in the previously:

 ! *[E]ducation was not a segregated activity, conducted for certain hours, in certain places, at a certain time of life. It was the aim of the society. The city educated the man.* (Hutchins, 1968, p. 133)

The ancient person was educated first by family and then, by culture (that is, *paideia*). One’s familial and cultural relations largely defined the ancient life-world of study. However, as these ancient societies—notably, Greek city-states—rationalized, becoming states and nations defined by laws and rules, institutional systems of study emerged to support the reproduction of increasingly complex forms of social order.

Plato (2003) cast a formative vision of this institutionalized world of study:

 ! *By maintaining a sound system of education and upbringing you produce citizens of good character; and citizens of sound character, with the advantage of a good education, produce in turn children better than themselves and better able to produce still better children in turn, as can be seen with animals.* (p. 125)

While Plato’s idea had little affect in his own time, clearly, the shadow that his idea has cast upon the future is significant. Indeed, we might argue that Plato planted an ancient seed that became our modern idea of progress cast, here, within the context of formalized education. Closely related to his idea of progress, and progress in a society’s institutionalization of study is Plato’s notion of the “good.” The good is a central element of Plato’s theory of knowledge, his vision of a just society and individual, and the purpose of his system of education (that is, his institutional view of study). Plato’s pithy definition of the good comes near the end of the *Republic* when he compares the concept with that of evil by stating, “I call anything that harms or destroys a thing evil, and anything that preserves and benefits it good” (Plato, 2003, p. 355). His definition appears to be straightforward and clear, but it raises questions about what precisely does he have in mind by “anything that preserves and benefits” a thing? In social terms, his “Good” relates to the preservation and benefit of the whole community. For the individual, it relates to the preservation and benefit of a person’s mind/soul as a whole.

For Plato, development of the good is made possible through study. Specifically, it is the individual’s upward progress of the mind from the lower world of shadows and opinions towards the upper world of light and knowledge. Beyond what we can know lies the “Good,” which is distinct from knowledge, and yet it is through knowledge that one can come closest to the “Good.” While Plato’s epistemology is clearly more complicated, the important insight for our current discussion is that Plato established the subsequently persistent idea that study is directional, and that it is oriented toward seeking *ends.* That is, study is an educative experience that results in a person becoming *educated.* The way we began to formalize how someone could become educated was through the idea of a “course” of study.

### The Course of Study

Within educational institutions a *course* of study, or simply a course, is generally referred to the curriculum. Interestingly, these two education terms, course and curriculum, are closely related. As Egan (1978) explains, the initial Latin meaning of the word curriculum “was ‘a running,’ ‘a race,’ ‘a course,’ with secondary meanings of a ‘race-course,’ ‘a career.’” (p. 66). What is curriculum? Put simply, it is “what is to be taught and how” (Alexander, 2001, p. 549). Framed broadly, “curriculum communicates what we choose to remember about our past, what we believe about the present, what we hope for the future” (Pinar, 2004, p. 20). Dewey provides us with a helpful analogy about the curriculum as both a map and a journey. That is, his map image describes *curriculum as a plan* and his journey image described *curriculum as a lived experience.* Dewey’s main point is to caution us against mistaking the map for the journey; however, he also recognized the crucial role the map plays in this journey.

Explaining the important role of the map Dewey (1902) writes:

 ! *Well, we may first tell what the map is not. The map is not a substitute for a personal experience. The map does not take the place of an actual journey. The logically formulated material of a science or branch of learning, of a study, is no substitute for the having of individual experiences. The mathematical formula for a falling body does not take the place of personal contact and immediate individual experience with the falling thing. But the map, a summary, an arranged and orderly view of previous experiences, serves as a guide to future experience; it gives direction; it facilitates control; it economizes effort, preventing useless wandering, and pointing out the paths which lead most quickly and most certainly to a desired result. Through the map every new traveler may get for his own journey the benefits of the results of others’ explorations without the waste of energy and loss of time involved in their wanderings–wanderings which he himself would be obliged to repeat were it not for just the assistance of the objective and generalized record of their performances. That which we call a science or study puts the net product of past experience in the form which makes it most available for the future. It represents a capitalization which may at once be turned to interest. It economizes the workings of the mind in every way. Memory is less taxed because the facts are grouped together about some common principle, instead of being connected solely with the varying incidents of their original discovery. Observation is assisted; we know what to look for and where to look. It is the difference between looking for a needle in a haystack, and searching for a given paper in a well-arranged cabinet. Reasoning is directed, because there is a certain general path or line laid out along which ideas naturally march, instead of moving from one chance association to another.* (p. 284)

The learning design and its associated documents that we create as educators constitute a map of the terrain to be covered within a course of study (that is, a learning program). Nevertheless, it is important to recognize it is not an exhaustive view of the territory, but simply sets directive guidance for the teachers’ and students’ journey through this terrain. In short, *curricular documents, like a syllabus, simply serves as the guide to the learning experience.* As educators, we shouldn’t be bound to it. In our role of coaching and facilitating transformational learning our role is to acts as guides in the curricular journey that students are undertaking and they work to complete a particular course of study. 
