---
title: 'Learning Activities'
hide_page_title: false
show_sidebar: '1'
hide_git_sync_repo_link: false
---



### Learning Activities

#### Activity 6.1: GATHERING: Class meeting with Professor.

In this week’s conference meeting, your professor will provide a 40 minute talk
on the role power influence and negotiation strategies have on team and
organizational decision-making. Following the presentation by the professor will
be a 20 minute interactive dialogue about healthy and unhealthy team leadership
and experiences with poor team leaders.

This 1 hour online session will be recorded for future reference.

In order to prepare for the meeting, you are invited to view the following
slides. Your instructor will go through this presentation
during the gathering, so as you view the slideshow, be sure to jot down notes
and questions.

[button url="https://gitpitch.com/TWUOnline/gitpitch-decks/master?grs=github&t=black&p=LDRS502-6" target="_blank" label="Unit 6 Slides" type="info" classes="external-link"]_

---

#### Activity 6.2: COMMUNITY BUILDING: Every Voice Matters

Leading teams and managing processes to effectively include every team member in
decision-making and the team’s ‘Story’ is much harder than it seems on the
surface. Leaders are often distracted by the pressures they face from above them
within the organization, the challenges they face across from them with other
leaders at the same level as they are, and management challenges dealing with
those within their own organizational units. Vertical and horizontal pressure
constantly bombard the leader to the point where they often forget that there
are real people within their teams that are trying to make their own way through
the labyrinth of the organization.

The more leaders forget about the real needs of people within their teams, the
more disconnected they can become and the more likely they are to dismiss the
voices of those within their teams that need to be heard.

**This exercise is called, “Every Voice Matters”**.

Throughout the internet there are hundreds (possibly thousands) of companies who
are trying to help organizations with team building and communication. Most of
these companies are localized and perform functions, team building activities,
communication and collaboration tools to help organizations use and harness the
power of teams more effectively.

For this week, you are going to search the internet to find teambuilding models,
strategies, exercises and activities that can help the leader do one thing with
their team--Make sure that Every Voice is Heard.

Once you locate the resource on the internet that you believe is a good example
of a strategy that ensures all voices are part of the team conversation, you are
going to review the resource, exercise, game or strategy and write a review of
the exercise and upload for the entire class to review. Much like the research
article review, you are going to play a role in developing resources for the
students of this class and future classes to use as they strive to become more
effective team leaders. 

Please see the Assessments section of this unit as it has the requirements for
you to complete for the review.

---

#### Activity 6.3: PERSONAL STUDY AND REFLECTION

Read Chapter 8 “Power and Social Influence” and Chapter 9 “Decision-Making” in
your Levi textbook and be sure to take detailed notes.

#### Activity 6.4: ASSEMBLING AS A TEAM

In the 6th week of class, you will need to begin the process of developing a
conflict management model for your team based project. The conflict resolution
model should be robust and include the various types of conflict and resources
to deal with conflict as a team. Teams will need to submit your conflict
resolution model in week 7. See full details about this assignment in the
Assessment section for this unit.

---
#### Activity 6.5: INSPIRATION:

Select a Team member to provide and inspirational/motivational talk or devotion
for the team to consider together. Find a relaxing place to consider the day and
debrief about the course and program together. Document that team member’s
presentation in Moodle by the end of the day.

---
### Unit 6 Summary

In Unit 6 you had the opportunity to learn about power and power dynamics. You
have seen how power dynamics and empowerment can affect a team and ways to
encourage and apply assertiveness. You have looked at the value of
decision-making as well as different approaches and tactics to have successful
group decisions. You have learned about the impact of emotions, disagreements
and negative pressures, and how different techniques can help resolve these
problems. Careful attention to how we manage teams and the experiences of team
members is critical to ensure that the team contributes to the organization
reaching its full potential.
