Intro

In today’s digital world, interacting with technology and the ability to connect and communicate through the internet has become much more than a tool; it’s evolved to become an integral part of how we live our lives and how we connect and socialize as a society. Until recently, I had never thought much about the implications and consequences of agreeing to the “terms and agreements”; they are often tediously long, convoluted and incredibly vague. I admit I have been completely guilty of skipping down to the bottom blindly checking that accept button, never really pausing to think about what I am really acknowledging and accepting in terms of my privacy. My background knowledge is fairly limited in the area and as a new teacher just beginning my career, I feel that it is important more than ever to educate myself and become aware of the regulations and precautions that come with using online platforms with students. As an educator it is my job to create a safe learning environment; I believe this applies beyond the walls of the classroom and applies to the online platforms we are integrating into the classroom and exposing our students to.  In a world that has become technology focused and driven I feel that it is imperative to think critically about the programs we are using with our young learners. With privacy issues on the rise in the education system, I want to become far more aware and knowledgeable about the implications that arise with an online presence.

Until beginning this paper, I had little knowledge of how this Google phenomenon had become an issue, especially in the classrooms. As an educator I want to explore what issues with privacy are arising with the use of online platforms in classrooms (in this case focusing on Google), What changes need to take place to insure the safety and security of student’s personal information?  And how could is this google phenomenon potentially influence new generations of learners? As this is a very large topic I hope to graze the surface of some of these concerning issues. If this is also unfamiliar territory for you, I hope this paper provides you with some insight and intrigues you to dig deeper into this concerning and eye-opening topic

The loop hole

In public classrooms across the country, the corporate name that is fast becoming as common as pencils and erasers is Google. Google has captured the attention of administrations and schools across the country and its fast rise has partly been because of low cost Chromebooks and its free software to schools (Peterson, 2015).In just a few short years, Google has become a dominant force as a provider of education technology. But what I have recently discovered is that the Googles terms of service for education, which schools stand behind might not be as secure as they have been led to believe.

Google promotes it’s accessibility to their free apps and “secure polices”, but at what real cost? Many school administrators may not realize just how much information Google is collecting or how it may be used beyond providing educational services. And for many parents and educators, this is concerning. Are these free apps really free? At what cost do we continue to use these platforms and continue to blissfully ignore the bigger issue here-our students privacy.

In the very hard to find and craftily written terms of service,  “Google only considers some services parts of its education suite — such as Gmail, Calendar, Google Docs — but not others such as Search, Maps, Youtube, and Google News. Which means, if students are logged into their educational account and use Google News to find stories for a report or watches a history video on Youtube, Google can use that activity to build a profile about them and serve them advertisements outside its educational products” (Peterson, 2015).

Another factor that lays hidden in Google Apps for education terms of service if the factor of third parties. Directly from Google for education website, it states that they are “committed to building products that help protect student and teacher privacy”, however, every time a learner accesses a third party app via their Apps for Edu account, their data flows to the third party vendor, and is governed by the terms set by that vendor. Google’s rules no longer apply and as soon as a learner strays outside the core Google Apps offerings, their data can be used for a range of non-educational purposes (Fitzgerald, 2015).

In their education-specific terms of service, Google makes the following statement about data and ads:

But know where is the “ads purposes” defined. So what does this mean? Terms such as these needs to be addressed and clearly defined for the public; Google needs to step forward and define exactly how they process data collected within the core Apps for Edu suite, and how they use that data (Fitzgerald, 2015).

Should the promotion and use of Google apps and product continue, despite their negligence of student’s privacy? Platforms which profit from manipulating and sell young learners personal information to vast companies all over the world.  

Time for educators take action

As an educator in elementary school, we teach students how to use basic programs, how to find credible information and about cyber bullying, but in today’s digital world, is that enough? There are gaps that need to be connected. A key factor that is not being emphasized is the importance of privacy of personal information, but in a “behind the scenes” way.  Teaching students how to be aware of how personal information can be mined and manipulated, teaching them how to think critically about the programs they are using. Educators need to be teaching valuable skills that are transferable to any program they use in their future. Schools need to support staff in teaching skills like how to investigate privacy policies and look deeper into what “that” program is doing for the safety and protection of student’s privacy. Teaching how to looks for key phrases. Before teachers can educate students they need to become informed themselves. Now more than ever there needs to be an emphasis in administrative staff to create opportunities for teachers to learn how to model critical analysis of the programs used, especially ones with students.

There needs to be more education for teachers about these privacy issues. A concerning issue I read was the issues of schools having an over reliance on “privacy by policy” (Cope &Cardozo, 2018). Which mean schools and administration promoting these platforms are putting their faith and full confidence in programs such as Google, without looking deeper into the terms of services laid out by that company. Not only do Schools need to take further steps to inform teachers using these programs but they need to dig deeper into the privacy policy’s laid out and be critical about the programs they are allowing (and promoting) student access to.

Consumers of google

Going beyond the concerning topics above, I began to think about what long term effects could arise from these new generations which are heavily influenced by Google programs and products. Using the Google platform and promoting its use, educators are innately creating a generation of google consumers (Desson, 2018). Consumers from which at a young age have built a sense of loyalty and preference to google products (Desson, 2018); this is scary.  Through the heavy influence of Google in the classroom educators are curating consumers who will naturally be drawn to Google products as they mature into adults.  

As a fairly new educator the field, I have been excited about these new innovations and the easily accessible Google products but since investigating this topic I now hold a feeling of manipulation. In a way educators have unknowingly become google employees and sales reps. This makes me feel as though I am putting my student’s privacy at risk so Google can make a buck. If we keep “selling” the use of programs which interfere with students writes to privacy, then we are just feeding the future consumers of tomorrow. Knowing this now I feel it’s my obligation to teach students to be critical about the many platforms that are out there today.

Conclusion

This is a huge topic of controversy in the education world and I have only grazed the surface of some of these main concerns.

To re-cap, not only is there severe gaps in the actual privacy of Google Apps For Education terms of service, there also rests issues within schools over reliance on these corporations privacy policies (Cope & Cardozo, 2018). In today’s digital driven word, we need to approach these platforms with one eye closed; we need to think critically which programs we are exposing students to. Yes Google’s platform offers easily accessible and “free” products, but at what real cost- The cost of students privacy and my own.  As educators we are planting the seed for the use of google products in young minds, whether its ramifications are fully realized yet or not. If we are going to continue to use platforms such as Google to their full potential, changes need to be made. Clear and explicit definitions need to be laid out for the public. Along with this, further education in privacy awareness is needed. Schools and administrations need to put these issues at the top of their priorities. Moreover, these issues should be a wake-up call not just to Google, but to other companies handling student data. There are so many different apps and providers and overwhelmingly students are not getting the kind of security and privacy protection they deserve.

What are your thoughts on Google’s “Classroom”? A welcome addition to teaching and learning, or a move in which teachers and students should be wary?
