


Toady, people are having more chances getting to know about some of the latest computer science buzzwords by watching news and leaks of how user data stored on Facebook or Google server is yet breached again but they are far from appealing or exciting to many who have given critiques on how the entrie tech industry are handling with personal data. On the other hand, assume considering from another point of view, those many who have been unsure about what path to take for their future career might since then have a chance reviewing whether there is a thriving demand on computing techniques and skills; so they may find getting into the industry as a good option.  

In fact, it is not surprised that some researches have already discovered that almost all employers in every industry from IT to real estates are constantly seeking new supplies for their information engineering departments, according to a survey conducted by Stack Overflow (“Stack Overflow Developer Survey 2019”, 2019).

It is also worth mentioning that many countries are taking steps to cultivate programming as a necessary subject of teaching even starting before post-secondary education; some have chosen to do so by making programming mandatory in secondary school curricula. For instance, Japan has been reported having passed a bill to make programming courses compulsory, starting from 2020 in middle school (Verma, 2016); Finland, which has been long keeping ahead of the computer science education in Europe, even designated programming a compulsory for primary school students since grade one, started fall 2016 (Toikkanen, 2015). However, a research group in Aalto University emphasized on its blog that differs to other European countries, Finland’s programming requirement is not fulfilled by taking a separate course, but by intuitively applying and combining coding skills with other subjects such as mathematics, as a new pedagogical method to better foster students’ senses on thinking logically.  

Similar progresses are being made within Canada: coding is being added to the course curriculum in many secondary schools; which some have started several years earlier in Ontario, and some three years ago in B.C. (Silcoff, 2016).

Finland’s solution to the new course design serves an identical goal in comparison to the many interdisciplinary programs offered by computer science department in major post-secondary institutions online and onsite: to take the full advantage of computer science skills and apply it to other fields. In today’s both K-12 and post-secondary education, a trend of adopting programming trainings as a supportive study to other subjects is rapidly increasing and has recently reached a new plateau. Even though some course designs for such purposes may seem yet under-refined for no matter the online or on-site ones, educators should not discard valuing non-major programming courses as more past experiments and exercises of online programming teaching rather have proved their validity on bring sufficient benefit to the learners.

Finland, who still remains the prominent one among many countries who are in the process of introducing programming into their K-12 curricula, has consequently felt the need to train not only the students, but also teachers to teach programming at the elementary school level as well. In one paper that describes how elementary math teachers were educated online to teach programming using the Racket programming language through a MOOC project. The researchers set to increase teachers’ both content knowledge and technological pedagogical content knowledge in mathematics, and generated results that teachers were “willing to learn programming and appreciated the pedagogical considerations” and “if the level of difficulty and workload were becoming reasonable, learners will perform well…” (Partanen et al., 2017). However, one major pre-requisite for generating the good study result stands on that the Finnish teachers are believed by the researchers to “have great will in constantly upgrading and improving their knowledge on their teaching subject”; and the self-efficacy of Finnish teachers is considered high globally. In addition, the teachers have shown to be “aware of the new standards set by the education authorities as a response to the rapid technological development”; which means their internal motivation is relatively stronger (Partanen et al., 2017). The above three factors have highlighted that self-motivation is crucial to achieve good result on online programming learning.

At the same time, programming and computer science related courses are forming a big portion in students’ latest undergraduate degree plan today, especially for those in STEM. Although learners are all aware that they would be involved in some sort of hands-on programming beforehand when they have chosen to pursue an interdisciplinary degree combining computer science and other fields, complications of the course material could still be too much beyond what they have expected thus often offset their passion in the course; while passion has been proved as the most important factor in online education. Unreasonable course difficulty in particular, is a key factor that affects student performance. In programming, usually it varies by different programming languages used on lectures. Programming languages which are popular but hard to master are like C and C++; those that are considered more beginner-friendly have examples like Java and Python. In a case study of designing a non-major computing course launched at Georgia Institute of Technology, the researchers Guzdial and Forte “settled on Python — in particular, the Python dialect, implemented in Java…” (Guzdial & Forte, 2005, p. 363) as they discovered that starting from Python, which uses less code to achieve the same functionality compared to other three languages, might be an optimal plan for beginners, and the schema applies to all methods of education including online education.

Learning to program is difficult. For students who seek traditional institution-offered programming training to boost their competency in job application, they are only interested in the fact that ‘to what extent do the programming skills learned can become a useful tool’ in the way of solving problems in their original areas of study. Academically, these programmers are usually classified as the conversational programmers (Guo et al., 2015) or the application programmers (Haynes & Mudgett, 2016). In the study conducted by Haynes and Midgett, they identified and acknowledged that:  

    Non-CS programmers usually lack obvious motivation for taking any computer science related courses;  
    Non-CS programmers are often application programmers who only write software for a real- life task, which means they want to be more practical on the subject, not to discourse it. (Sec. II, B)

The two pieces of conclusions all add weight to one point: non-CS programmers, mostly those who would prefer to spend some extra time and learn programming online, would take the most chances implementing the programming skills as they encounter problems in their own fields of study, as the sole way to make their learning truly rewarding and productive.  

Appreciating students’ learning habits is also significant in the process of online programming education, since those methods that people have commonly adopted in face-to-face programming education may not be applicable in the online context. In a case study examining the learning style of distanced programming learners in a combined synchronous and asynchronous setting with lower than average programming difficulty. The researcher has discovered that many learning patterns of online programming course are as identical as the what we can see in a general one and described one type of learners “…usually choose to learn through self-analyzing such as trial and error and discovery learning” and concluded “… is generally known, a programming course has a typically inductive … This situation was also the same in the online environment”. At the meantime, it also suggested the importance of generating concentration of synchronous online learners by stating that “At this point, it may be proper for instructors to highlight the course records and to direct the students…”; as well as emphasizing that “instructors … provide support for these students at the beginning of the terms”; it urges online programming learners to self differentiate themselves from general learners that they may even need more extra help and guide from their instructors as they may experience inconvenience on seeking for help(Çakıroğlu, 2019).  

As for the question on how online programming learning can fulfill their purposes for non-major programmers, a study held at the Simon Fraser University might have already given out some insights. By putting both graduate and undergraduate into a research program on the modeling of Complex Social Systems, and using computer technology as the major tool, the research team concluded that such collaboration had increased “mutual understanding between computer science majors and non-majors”, as well as boosted the number of papers published (Dabbaghian, Reid, & Giabbanelli, 2012, p. 51). In the humanities discipline, researchers also received meaningful and positive outcomes that students had better engage in the Gothic novel study through quantitative analysis and computational problem-solving, after implementing computer science concepts into English literature teaching, despite the students were all in English majors with almost zero programming experience (Brylow, Czarnik, & Bort, 2015). Many more uses of programming skills for non-CS purposes also include:

    Accessing NASA data on exoplanets and stars (astronomy)
    Creating graphs and visualizing data (psychology, astronomy, physics, economics)
    Creating virtual physics demonstrations and models (physics)     
    Use Data Mining on the web for scientific research data (biology, psychology).

In summary, online and distributed computing courses can bring benefits to its students as long as the course is being well-designed, and the students could have perceived the significance of online programming learning before boldly ordering any programming language textbooks without hesitation. Today, involving in a CS-relatd course online is no more ‘less efficient’ or ‘less feasible’ when compared to when learning in the face-to-face style, as more and more are choosing to learn programming online.

References

Brylow, D., Czarnik, M., & Bort, H. (2015). Introducing Computing Concepts to Non-Majors: A Case Study in Gothic Novels (pp. 132-137). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).

Dabbaghian, V., Reid, A., & Giabbanelli, P. (2012). Interdisciplinary teaching and learning in computing science: three years of experience in the MoCSSy program (pp. 47-51). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).

Guo, P., Armstrong, B., Hurst, A., Ho, A., Dembla, S., Alcock, C., & Chilana, P. (2015). Perceptions of non-CS majors in intro programming: The rise of the conversational programmer (pp. 251-259). IEEE.

Guzdial, M., & Forte, A. (2005). Design process for a non-majors computing course. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 37(1), 361-365. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1047124.1047468

Haynes, S., & Mudgett, D. (2016). Teaching programming as application development from the ground up (pp. 1-9). IEEE.

Salter, A. (2011). “Program or be Programmed?”. ProfHacker. Retrieved 12 August 2019, from http://www.chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/program-or-be-programmed/37448

Silcoff, S. (2016). B.C. To add computer coding to school curriculum. The Globe And Mail. Retrieved 12 August 2019, from http://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/bc-government-adds-computer-coding-to-school-curriculum/article28234097/

Toikkanen, T. (2015). Coding in school: Finland takes lead in Europe – learning environments research group. Retrieved 12 August 2019, from http://legroup.aalto.fi/2015/11/coding-in-school-finland-takes-lead-in-europe/

Verma, A. (2016). Japan just made computer programming A compulsory subject in its schools. Retrieved 12 August 2019, from https://fossbytes.com/japan-computer-programming-compulsory-subject-schools/

Stack Overflow Developer Survey 2019. (2019). Stack Overflow. Retrieved 12 August 2019, from https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2019#company-type

Partanen, T., Niemela, P., Mannila, L., & Poranen, T. (2017). Educating Computer Science Educators Online A Racket MOOC for Elementary Math Teachers of Finland. Scitepress.org. Retrieved 15 August 2019, from https://www.scitepress.org/Papers/2017/62578/62578.pdf

Çakıroğlu, Ü. (2019). Analyzing the effect of learning styles and study habits of distance learners on learning performances: A case of an introductory programming course | The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning. Irrodl.org. Retrieved 15 August 2019, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1840/3004
