---
title: Assessment
---


## Unit 6 Assessment


### Assignment: Discussion – ‘Every Voice Matters’ Review of Online Team building Resources 

After completing this unit, including the learning activities, you are asked to
scour the internet in search of great team building resources, activities or
exercises that will serve to bring teams together and ensure that every voice is
heard through the team process.

Once you have selected your team resource, activity or exercise, review the
resource by searching through the activity for more information, looking for
online reviews of the activity, or pilot testing the activity with friends,
family or co-workers to test its effectiveness.

Once finished this process please upload the following information into the
Moodle forum for course interaction and information:

1.  Title of the resource, activity or exercise.

2.  Authors names, and affiliation information.

3.  Full URL and date when you identified the resource.

4.  Underlying theory or rationale for the resource, activity or exercise. In
    this section, please describe the intent or purpose of the resource,
    activity or exercise.

5.  Briefly explain how the resource, activity or exercise can be used in all
    its variations (if any variations exist). How long does it take to complete?
    How many people can it handle? How much does it cost to do? Is it localized
    or virtual? etc. (1-2 pages)

6.  Outline the evidence that shows the resource, activity, or exercise achieves
    the goal of ensure that all voices on a team are heard. Please describe the
    evidence that supports your conclusion (online reviews, pilot testing that
    you have conducted, etc.)

Once completed, please upload your review to Moodle. As the week progresses,
take the time to look through other reviews submitted by your classmates so you
are prepared for the discussion that will start week 7.

### Assignment: Team Conflict Management Model (10%)

**(Due at the conclusion of week 7)**

**What is Conflict Management?**

Conflict management starts with an assumption that conflict is both normal and
healthy in all relationships. Conflict emerges when people have competing
interests, values, and roles or when people differ in their history, age,
gender, experience, ethnicity, etc. People experience conflict every day of
their lives. Conflict is more likely to occur as an internal process than a
process that occurs between people.

In Psychology, we use terms like cognitive conflict, cognitive disequilibrium,
or cognitive dissonance to describe the internal experience people have when
their internal cognitive representations of the world come into conflict with
their immediate experiences. In fact, all models of growth and personal
development have conflict or tension at the centre of the internal pressure for
people to change, adapt and grow. A concept of Positive Emotive Tension Theory
(PETT) posits that people are strongest when they are in relationships or life
situations that exert tension or pressure on them. The tension that is created
between people is a positive force that enables balance and perspective to
impact people’s decision-making. Most people try to resolve the cognitive
dissonance that is created between internal representations of the world and
external realities of life. The concept of conflict management is that we don’t
have to always resolve conflict. We can live in a world where cognitive
representations are held in a balanced tension for long periods of time.

**Conflict is Good.**

Interpersonal conflict management starts with an assumption that conflict is a
good and healthy aspect of relationships. Conflict helps us share our
perspectives, to learn about others and their diverse ways of seeing the world,
to challenge our worldview and to refine our thinking to improve our
decision-making processes. The starting point to become healthy in our approach
to conflict management is to accept that conflict is good and can help us to
learn, improve, and thrive in relationships.

**Conflict Management Takes Time.**

Although most people would naturally desire to avoid conflict or pretend it
doesn't exist, conflict identifies a flaw in thinking, flaw in values, flaw in
communication, or a flaw in process. In order to understand the nature of the
flaw, we need to take the time to understand all perspectives, to allow each
voice to be heard, to provide a venue for open and frank discussion, and to
communicate each person’s value to the organization.

**Conflict Management Requires Consistent and Stable Structures.**

Because people naturally do not trust those who disagree with them, most will
assume negative intentions, vested interests, ulterior motives, or destructive
intent when they come into conflict with others. Because these negative
reactions cloud people’s judgements about ‘the other’, a good conflict
management process must be structurally clear and consistent. Usually, this type
of management system is defined in organizational policy in order to ensure
people know where to take matters when there is conflict.

**Conflict Management Requires Independent Processes.**

Again, As with structure, the processes involved in good conflict management
revolve around perceptions of unfairness, power inequality, gender, race and
sexual orientation inequalities (that are all protected by the human rights code
and charter), etc. As a result, there must be clear processes that are
independent of these forces. My experience is that most organizations and people
within them are not inherently biased, but when it comes to conflict, perception
becomes reality. In designing your conflict management model, you must be clear
to develop processes that cannot be influenced unduly by role or title within an
organization. It should be noted from my personal experience that Christian
organizations are often the poorest at developing good processes for conflict
management. Christian organizations start with an understanding that people love
each other, have grace, should put everyone else first, etc. These assumptions
often stem from the ‘masks’ we put on to fit in to the Christian community.
Christians are just as prone to bias, jealousy, hate, competition, feelings of
inadequacy and unfairness, etc as other people. Christian organizations are
generally in more need of good conflict management processes than other
organizations are.

**What does a good conflict management system look like?**

1.  There is an underlying assumption that people do not mean to do harm or
    damage and that they are trying to do what they believe it right.

2.  People’s feelings are always real. Whether we agree with how those feelings
    arose or whether they are justified and proportionate, the experience of the
    other is a real experience.

3.  People need help to manage conflict. People don’t know how to manage
    conflict effectively and are usually prone to ignore the conflict rather
    than manage it effectively.

4.  People don’t know how to communicate well regarding conflict. People may not
    be able to contain their emotions and hold in their thoughts when it comes
    to conflict. Often the emotion has been pent up for so long that when it is
    time to speak, words are not organized well and thinking is not clear.
    anger, rage, hostility, fear, crying all may emerge when discussing
    conflicts. The person who is managing the conflict process must not take
    things personally as they may initially bear the brunt of the pent up
    emotional response.

5.  Conflict management must have an internal and an external process to ensure
    that the issues can be addressed fairly and completely.

MODEL

Internal

1.  Initial conflict is brought to the attention of the other person. After a
    frank discussion and presentation of issues and sides, the conflict is
    either addressed or needs to be escalated.

2.  Immediate supervisor is brought in to hear both sides and attempt to mediate
    the conflict.

3.  An internal conflict resolution system is engaged to manage the process. Two
    sides are usually formalized at this point with written presentations from
    both sides. A internal neutral third party (often HR) is brought in to hear
    the sides and make a recommendation.

External

4. If internal processes cannot resolve the conflict, an outside mediator with
training in such matters is brought into the issue.

5. If the mediator is unable to manage the conflict effectively, arbitration or
binding arbitration is the final step. Usually arbitration brings closure, but
often underlying feelings remain.

6. Depending on the organization, there is always the right to sue and take
legal action independently against the institution.

Checking your Learning
----------------------

Before you move on to the next unit, you may want to check to make sure that you
are able to:

-   Assess the importance of power in team decision-making.

-   Discriminate between appropriate and healthy uses of power and inappropriate
    uses of power relationships.

-   Describe social influences on team decision-making.

-   Assess the social Psychological influences on group processes and team
    dynamics.

-   Equip others to effectively analyze productive and effective group processes
    compared to ineffective group processes.
