---
title: 'Activity 5-10'
alert_style: alert-secondary
published: true
visible: false
---

<details>
  <summary><b>Topic 2.3: The Post-Modern Condition - Click here to expand</b></summary>
  <p>Simply put, while science was an incredibly powerful way of understanding the natural world, it was less successful at describing or more importantly predicted the social world. Jean-François Lyotard described this dissolution with the limits of science to know the world, the post-modern condition. Lyotard’s primary interest is the high-status knowledge produced by the social institutions of highly developed (Western) societies. In his seminal work <i>The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge</i> (Lyotard, 1984) he notes that a primary characteristic of this type of knowledge production is a modern notion that aspires to fit all forms of knowledge into a general unifying narrative. Lyotard designates any knowledge (in particular scientific) as modern that “legitimates itself with reference to a metadiscourse of this kind making an explicit appeal to some grand narrative, such as the dialectics of Spirit, the hermeneutics of meaning, the emancipation of rational or working subject, or the creation of wealth” (1984, p. xxiii).</p>

  <p>Lyotard’s contention with scientific knowledge is that it makes unifying appeals to grand metadiscourses. And, that in so doing it limits our sensitivity to the totality of true knowledge rather than serving to encompass it. That is, these grand narratives hold the appearance of making the complex easier to understand, but in actuality they desensitizes us to the world’s true complexity and the language games inherent in the narratives themselves. Consequently, he defines the “postmodern as incredulity toward metanarratives” (1984, p. xxiv). This is not to say that narratives are not an important knowledge form, but rather that “helpful” narratives tend to be local in nature (local sense-making to achieve local aims) and cannot be simply linked together into a general unifying scheme. Thus, we might summarize that the “postmodern condition is characterised by the co-existence of a multiplicity of heterogeneous discourses—a state of affairs assessed differently by different parties” (Cilliers, 1998, p. 114). For our discussion of education, this means that this is not one truly unified theory of education, or knowledge, or teaching, or even human learning.</p>

  <p>As Lyotard illustrates, “instead of trying to analyse complex phenomena in terms of single or essential principles,” postmodern approaches to thinking “acknowledge that it is not possible to tell a single and exclusive story about something that is really complex” (Cilliers, 1998, p viii). Consequently, the richness, complexity and diversity of the emerging postmodern perspectives has served to diminished the power of traditional modern discourses, which sought “to deliver a universal identity, sense of direction and historically assured destination” (Fry, 1999, p. 64). Likewise, as a “critical reappraisal of modern modes of thought” (Waters in Doll, 1993, p. 5) it’s fair to say that on the whole the postmodern condition has served to engender a greater flexibility of thinking within many domains, including education. However, it must also be noted that the diversity and contradictions of modernity that postmodern thinking brings to light were ever present in modernity itself, only they were repressed by our initial idealism or hidden from view prior to being institutionalized.</p>

  <p>As educators today, we have inherited a mix of classical, modern, and now post-modern ideas about education, knowledge, teaching, and learning. In short, educators, including adult educators, draw upon a diverse plurality of ideas about their practice. Moreover, learners, including adult learners have been shaped by different educational approaches. These thinking frameworks lie beneath all our discussions.</p>
</details>
