---
title: 'Topic 3'
hide_page_title: false
hide_git_sync_repo_link: false
visible: true
show_sidebar: '0'
---

## Topic 3: Study as the Site of Education

Learning ultimately occurs within the cognitive presence of individual learners, through their personal interactions with their self and the content. Historically, this educational experience has been widely understood as the practice known as study. McClintock (1971/2000) argues, “whether we like it or not, many … educators considered education to consist of neither teaching nor learning; instead, they found the diverse forms of study to be the driving force in education” (p. 167). While instruction in all of its various forms may play a role, the learner is always the one who does the work of learning. Citing Montaigne’s (1877) essay “Of the Education of Children” McClintock (1971/2000) notes, “teaching and learning might impart knowledge, whereas study led to understanding, whereby things known were made one's own and became a part of one's judgment, and ‘education, labor, and study aim only at forming that’” (p. 162). Here, we see how Dewey’s notion of the importance of learners adding their own meaning and application to what they learn connects to a thread of thought with a long history. We also see the educational idea of the normative or ethical element of whole personal transformation.

***What is study?*** The term comes into English as a shortening of the Old French noun *estudie,* and its verb form *estudier,* both based on the Latin term *studium.* This is also the root of the Latin word student. Cicero provides us with a formative use of the term in De Inventione:

 ! *Studium est autem animi assidua et vehementer ad aliquam rem adplicata magna cum voluptate occupatio, ut philosophiae, poeticae, geometricae, litterarum” [“Study is the assiduous and vehement occupation of the mind applied to anything with great eagerness (voluntate), as the study of philosophy, geometry, letters.”* (as translated in O'Malley, 1881, p. 269)] (1.36).

Cicero’s notion of study turns on the idea that it is an “occupation” of the mind, specifically, mental work that has to be done, or matters of the mind that have to be attended to. Moreover, study, here, is a careful application of this mental attention to a subject of inquiry. Indeed, study is an act of considerable labour as Erasmus (1965) writes in his dialogue The Art of Learning, “For my part, I know no other art of learning than hard work, devotion, and perseverance” (p. 461). As educators tasked with coaching others for learning and facilitating learning experiences it is important to be clear that ultimately it is the student who must do the actual work of learning. Indeed, regardless of how much help we as educators can provide students with their learning, learning is often difficult work. Therefore, a significant role that you play is to help by encouraging students to do this challenging task.

Cicero’s definition also suggests study is a zealous act of pleasure. He argues study is not merely the laboured devotion of time and attention to acquiring knowledge on a given subject, but rather a passionate pursuit of knowledge. Commenting on Cicero’s definition, O’Malley (1881) writes,

 ! *Whatever we strongly love we desire to possess, and if we see any probability of our efforts being crowned with success, we strain every nerve to make it our own. So intense is the pleasure of the votaries of knowledge as she unfolds and offers them her treasures, that labour ceases to be labour, or, if you will, becomes a labour of love, and receives a name which indicates its agreeable nature.* (p. 269)

Pleasure, here, is not limited only to a life of leisurely study, as was historically most commonly enjoyed by those who were, or were amongst, the elites, but rather is at its heart an act of utility to win self-control through self-formation. That is, study is historically the domain of what we now refer to as transformational learning. This transformational act of study may take many forms. As McClintock (1971/2000) puts it, “the ways of study are as diverse as the ways of men (sic), for both result, not from conformity to outward precept, but from the aspiration to assert inward control over the moving conjunction between one’s self and one’s circumstances” (para. 13). While the highest goal of study—such as, Plato’s pursuit of the “Good,” or Aristotle’s human “flourishing”—may be the same, or similar, “the path, the course of study, that leads to the goal will differ for each: thus the study appropriate for the quite cleric will not suit the proud prince, the worldly merchant, or the study artisan” (para. 14). Study emerges from the particular and unique lifeworld or lived-experience of those individuals who study—that is, the subjective human interests of students. As educators coaching for transformational learning, part of our role is to help students identify and clarify what interests them. What is more, we can help students connect their interests with their course of study and help them find joy in learning.

***How does one study?*** For McClintock (1971/2000), “study itself is neither a single path nor the final goal; it is the motivating power by which men (sic) form and impose their character upon their role in life” (para. 14). That is, study is an act of transformation and growth. Pinar (2006) helpfully adds that McClintock’s the use of “the verb ‘impose’ is too voluntarist and essentialist” because transformational learning or “reinvention of ourselves is limited, and occurs, yes, through acts of ‘will,’ but, as well, through waiting, withdrawing, dissimulation” (p. 112).  Historically, transformational learning was seen as the outcome of study—that is, learning was the result of study. Similarly, the historic idea of teaching was simply helping a student to study. Underlying this historic view of study as education was the recognition of human individuality, autonomy, and creativity. On this point, McClintock (1971) writes:

 ! *To those who thus recognized each person's autonomy of judgment, education could only incidentally be a process of teaching and learning; more essentially, it had to be a zig-zag process of trial and error, of studious, self-directed effort by which an inchoate, infantile power of judgment slowly gave itself form, character, perhaps even a transcendent purpose. This effort was study in its most general sense.* (p. 168)

Building upon the idea of study as self-formation is the student’s subjective habit of making sense of the world and finding their own way in it. It is a movement of thought characterized by Pinar’s (1975b, 2004) conception of *currere,* a running within the learner’s own lived-experiences. Understood as *currere,* study is a subjective act of structuring an objective world, upon which the learner imposes their own idiosyncratic subjectivity, which this world, then, embodies as their world of thought (Grumet, 1975). It is an attentive and open dialogue with the world of the learners lived-experience made possible by human language, which makes study discursive. As the dialogue with the learner’s lived-experience study is a reflective act where the learner both reflects in and on their experience (Schön, 1983). Through study, the learner prepares for future action by using their experience of the past. They reflect on present action, building upon what they already know. And, they consider what they don’t know, or what they think they know but don’t really, to estimate emerging opportunities, and predict future action by imagining the impossible and determining new capabilities. Study, writes Pinar (2015), “provides that knowledge from which we exercise judgment, as we reflect not only on the possible consequences of that step we’re about to take next, but the effects of steps that we have taken before” (p. 192). As an educator who is coaching students in their own study, your role is to help them develop their own judgement as they reflect in and on the learning experiences set out in their course of study. More importantly, you are helping navigate a dialogue with themselves about who they are becoming.

As educators coaching students for transformational learning our overarching aim is to help students make sense of how to reflect in and on the converging and emerging of their past, present, and future. How does this work? Pinar (2015) characterizes this self-transformational that is study as follows:

 ! *The unforeseeable future, the not fully accessible present, as well as the persistence of the past, converge to contribute to the gravity of study, even when it is conducted playfully. Study acknowledges the mystery saturating everyday life, thereby decentering the self as it redirects our attention to reality in which we live. Steadied through study we can reactivate the past in the present, unsettling our sense of what is at stake in the situation we face today and tomorrow. Studying the past permits us to anticipate the future. Not only temporality structures study, so does space, as the boundaries of one’s world blur into the world, which we know extends well beyond our capacity to apprehend it.* (p. 192)

Bound by a space and a time, study is a particularity, not a generality. Study is embodied in individual lives, it is a place and situation “saturated by meaning, with culture and history as these are personified in specific people with whom we live as neighbors, fellow citizens, and humanity” (Pinar, 2015, p. 192). The act of study as defined by McClintock and Pinar is not something, which is limited to a formal program of study. Rather, McClintock and Pinar remind us all of culture, and nature, can be educational. Going back to antiquity, Hutchins (1968, p. 133) notes that “education was not a segregated activity,” but rather as was the situation in Greece, “the Athenian was educated by culture, by paideia” (p. 33). The critical insight to emerge, here, is that “study is the site of education” (Pinar, 2006, p. 112). The nature of study is a very personal, often difficult, potentially joyous, dialogue of self-transformation. As educators, our ultimate role is to help others in their personal acts of study and self-transformation.

[plugin:content-inject](../_5-3)
