---
title: 'Activity 5-8'
alert_style: alert-secondary
published: true
visible: false
---

<details>
  <summary><b>Topic 2.1: The Pre-Modern Condition - Click here to expand</b></summary>
Educational ideas about what things of worth should be learned and how they should be learned emerge from our theories of knowledge. That is, how one seeks to lead others to know presumes knowledge of what knowledge is and how one comes to have knowledge. Moreover, knowledge is (often, if not always) value laden, making ethical claims on how people ought to live. So, it might also be said that people’s educational ideas about knowledge are informed by their ethical propositions. Lastly, knowledge (typically) is directed at something, which further requires a metaphysical consideration of what there is. Or, in other words, a consideration of the ways in which the known (anything that is) relates to knowledge (what is represented or thought to be). This tri-part conception of knowledge is one we inherited in the West from the ancient Greeks.

Indeed, this way of understanding knowledge and education persisted through Roman times, the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and remnants remain to this day. The early meaning of the word “education,” reflected this pre-modern condition of thought. The word arrives in the English language in the mid 16th century from the Latin term <i>educatio,</i> from the verb <i>educare,</i> with the stem <i>educo,</i> meaning <b>1)</b> to draw out, lead out, or <b>2)</b> to bring up, raise, rear, educate. The first thing that you might find interesting about this etymology is that the theory and practice of education and leadership have always been related to each other. That is, education from its earliest conception education involved leading others. What may not, at first, be apparent is the original meaning of the idea of “drawing” out, or “leading” out, that finds its formative source in antiquity.

In <i>Meno,</i> Plato gives this formative, if not the first, written account of the ancients’ educational notion of “leading out.” Plato described how Socrates engaged in dialogue with Meno’s slave, where he demonstrated to Meno that his slave is capable of learning a geometrical truth, because “his soul … always possessed this knowledge.” Put in the context of Plato’s broader dialogue, the text Meno begins with the character Meno asking Socrates if virtue can be taught? Socrates responds by asking Meno to define what is virtue? Then, using what has come to be known as the Socratic method—that is, asking Meno question after question to help him critically understand his thinking by exposing flaws in his logic and reasoning, followed by encouraging him to refine his theories, and ultimately helping him arrive at a tenable conclusion—Socrates brings Meno to the question: What is knowledge? The answer, which Socrates uses Meno’s slave to demonstrate, is that one is not taught, but rather only recollects knowledge from past lives. That is, knowledge is innate—one possesses a <i>priori</i> knowledge—and we learn by remembering what we already know, but didn’t yet know that we knew it. Put simply, <i><b>education involves “drawing forth” knowledge from within the person.</b></i>

It is important to note that the ancients did not view this form of knowledge from within that one could draw out as a “subjective” form of knowledge, as we might now interpret this idea. Rather, it was an “objective and universal” truth that existed within one’s soul.

This idea persisted, and by late antiquity Augustine, in his dialogue <i>On the Teacher,</i> still presents a similar concept of education when he writes, “Concerning universals of which we can have knowledge, we do not listen to anyone speaking and making sounds outside ourselves.” However, as a Christian he reframes this old idea slightly, suggesting that “We listen to Truth which presides over our minds within us.” For Augustine, this Truth within each person is Christ who he considers to be the real Teacher. This real Truth within is like light that allows people to discern things; in so much as we are able. This reframed idea was common through the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and in the context of Christian education various forms of this revised idea are still present today.

This idea of “drawing forth” knowledge remains an important concept for use, as in part, it forms a foundation to how we understand the roles of coaching learners and facilitating learning experiences.
</details>
