---
title: 'Activity 5-9'
alert_style: alert-secondary
published: true
visible: false
---


<details>
  <summary>**Topic 2.2: The Modern Condition - Click here to expand**</summary>
  Following, the classical tri-part conception of what one ought to know and how one comes to know, typical of ancient through the Middle Ages thought, a new modern condition of thought emerged. In the mid-17th century, the seeds of the Enlightenment (and more broadly speaking, the Modern Era) were planted by Descartes’ *Discourse on Method,* published in 1637, and by Isaac Newton’s *Principia Mathematica* in 1687. These two conceptual insights mark redactions of two longstanding Western thought traditions and together generate a new education paradigm. Ways of thinking inspired by Plato’s ideal Forms and Aristotle’s normative ideals were supplanted (respectively) by Descartes’ method of rightly conducting reason (philosophic positivism) and Newton’s system of mathematical physics (scientific method). Consequently, (and irrespective of any deductive or inductive distinction) the pre-modern “organic” paradigm of intellectual coherence shifted into a modern “mechanical” one. This new paradigm of learning introduced a now commonplace “constructivist” model of knowledge, which is at once, still modern and is presently shifting into something that is “beyond” that definition.

Regarding the modern condition, Doll (1993) writes, “the metaphor of mind shifted from being an abstract quality of the soul to being a ‘thing’ in the body” (p. 113). Descartes made a fundamental distinction between the materiality of body and the non-materiality of the mind — *res extensa* (the physical world) and *res cogitans* (the thinking being). The epistemological significance of this division was a shift from realism to idealism. Put differently, it was a shift from “object” knowledge that exists independent of the subject’s mind (objectivism) towards “object” knowledge that exists only within the subject’s mind (subjectivism). While not altogether a new idea Descartes’ mind-body split was unique in that he articulated a bidirectional relationship between these two realms. That is, while the mind was understood to be the body’s rational controller, so to, the body was seen to influence the mind’s otherwise rational control. The historical fallout for education was the development, in modern times, of two competing views of mind—behaviorism and cognitivism—in addition to the privileged place of “Positivism” over all other forms of knowing the world and coping with its challenges.

Newton’s contribution to the modern condition of thought was his view of Nature and its order—that is, its “uniformity” and “simple symmetry; and buried within that symmetry … a set of necessary, linear, causative relations accessible to exact mathematical description” (Doll, 1993, p. 34). Under Newton’s purview, the world, and its “events, activities, experiences,” became “quantified” (p. 35) and its future events became predictable. Taken together, Descartes and Newton signaled a conceptual shift in what we understand knowledge to be, and how we might best acquire it. The answer to what is worthwhile in education changed—that is, our conception of education became scientific.

Responding to the first of the two essential education question we raised above—What knowledge is of most worth?—Herbert Spencer (1896) writes, “the uniform reply is—Science” (p. 93). After systematically considering a broad and diverse array of worthwhile human knowledge Spencer makes the following summary and conclusion:

  <em>*For direct self-preservation, or the maintenance of life and health, the all important knowledge is—Science. For that indirect self-preservation which we call gaining a livelihood, the knowledge of greatest value is—Science. For the due discharge of parental functions, the proper guidance is to be found only in—Science. For that interpretation of national life, past and present, without which the citizen cannot rightly regulate his conduct, the indispensable key is—Science. Alike for the most perfect production and highest enjoyment of art in all its forms, the needful preparation is still—Science. And for purpose of discipline—intellectual, moral, religious—the most efficient study is, once more—Science.*</em> (pp. 93-94).

While today Science in education is commonplace, in Spencer’s day his complaint was that science, which he considered “of such transcendent value” actually “received the least attention” (p. 95) within education. Nevertheless, scientific and Positivist thinking did, in fact, widely permeate modern thought. In Descartes method of right reason, and Newton’s scientific method we looked to build a secure understanding of our world. As a result of these methods of thought new ideas, such as, Hegel’s description of history as dialectical process, or Marx’s description of economic development in social-cultural terms, or Spencer description of progressive social development as a process of social evolution began to shape our thinking and our education. A collective vision emerged to bringing the world into one moment of time, culture, economy, and political system. However, the viability of this project came to be seen as an ever more impossible goal.

In modern times, the old idea of teaching as a helping act leading a student to discover the Truth through their own act of study, transformed in a directive act of instructing the learning. That is, teachers become instructors, and students became learners. The hope of scientific education was twofold. First, we thought that if we could understand how people learn, then, we could understand how to instruct them in their learning. Metaphorically, we saw people as learning “machines” who could be “programmed” with instructions, just like we program computers. Second, we believed science could give us secure, reliable Truth, which we could then program our minds to hold. The problem is that people are not machines, and scientific knowledge is not secure.
